# Epoch check in commit revisited

As i was thinking about how to concretely implement the "Exception" state where everything in the pipeline is drained, and the execution only resumes when those are all gone, I realized it is a little tricky. This is mainly a bluespec problem, since we cannot apply a global flush (reset) signal to the flip flops. If we just drop instructions coming in at writeback, we'd be leaving junk in the FIFOs for each execution unit. The only reasonable way seems to let the execution proceed as normal and then suppress the commit part. 

I think this may cause weird scheduling conflicts, however. The rules will have to be firing while the exception state is active. Bluespec will probably see that i am trying to write to e.g. control registers in two rules and freak out. So I went back to the old idea of checking the epoch in commit stage. I wrote this off as not working because of this example: 

> Reason why is because a proceeding branch instruction which is in execute could flip it and then it would be wrong.

(say a load miss happens on epoch 0, then a branch (later in program order) executes and flips to epoch 1, and then the load returns and goes to commit, but it is on epoch 0 != 1, so it is incorrectly squashed.)

I think this can work, but it either needs to be 

1. *all* epoch switches are delayed until commit, which increases the latency of branch resolution

2. keep the epoch switch and check on execute stage, but add a new epoch register in the backend that stores the "architectural" epoch (instead of the value the frontend is using). then when an instruction is retired its epoch is checked against that. when branches are retired they increment this.

Not considering #1 as it seems too costly. 
So in the situation above, #2 would mean that the load miss happens, the branch then tells the frontend to switch to epoch 1, but the architectural epoch is still 0. So when the load is committed, it is on epoch 0 still, which is correct. 

We need to fundmentally separate these things in the same way that we keep some architectural state of the registers. Branches essentially execute loosely out of order in our system. The frontend is entirely speculative. So, to be able to check whether an instruction is on the correct path in the commit stage, we can't rely on the state of the frontend.

Now the question is how many epoch bits do we need. This seems a bit tricky. Suppose we have a load miss generating an exception. That means everything that comes after it is on the wrong path, but it many be many cycles before that exception is resolved. How many epoch flips could happen? In theory, up to floor(the size of the E2W buffer (which I believe is 8) / number of cycles for branch resolution). This is the maximum number of branches you can spam before the commit halts further execution. 

This doesn't seem reliable to calculate so I am going to add some form of backpressure to this branch resolution: if the frontend epoch is (backend epoch) + (# epochs - 2), execute is blocked. Why? Because if it ever got to be (backend epoch) + (# epochs - 1), then it is 1 switch away from wrapping around. In the situation above, the backend epoch stays 0 because commit is blocked, so we need to make sure the branches that are incrementing the frontend epoch never alias some path with 0. So first it should stop at (# epochs - 1). The extra one is because once the exception is resolved, the new path is going to be +1 on the frontend counter again. 

So now, under this scheme, Exceptions are as follows. There is no more waiting to flush the pipeline. We simply move to the exception state, where we increment the frontend epoch and set the backend epoch to the same one. PC is set here of course. When we resume the execution, we will be along the correct path.

The commit stage also of course checks the epoch of the instruction against the backend/architectural epoch now. It is squashed if they do not match.

