# Bus Errors

This code is problematic for many implementations:

```
ELSEIF ecause == XR17032_EXC_BUS AND procid == 0 AND FwBusErrorCallback THEN
    // This was a bus error, this is the boot processor, and a callback
    // was registered. This must be a normal bus error during probing.

    FwBusErrorCallback ()

    // Increment EPC by 4 to skip the instruction that caused the bus error.

    trapframe^.Epc += 4

ELSE
```

Sidenote: FwBusErrorCallback needs to be initialized in the ROM. currently it lives in BSS and is uninitialized so if a bus error occurs before it reaches probing code, it just crashes the ROM. This is probably OK because if something is erroring that earlier the system is obviously fucked, but I will have to change it for myself to debug. It should just be NULL; there was a bus error, but there was no callback.

This assumes bus execeptions happen synchronously. While some architectures provide support for both synchronous and asynchronous bus exceptions ([ARM](https://developer.arm.com/documentation/107706/0100/System-exceptions/Fault-exceptions-and-their-causes/Bus-faults)), for the most part, they are treated asynchronously ([riscv](https://stackoverflow.com/a/58829061/9683610)). What definitely does not exist is to handle all bus errors synchronously, because this would require blocking until a store is committed to the bus, which is highly problematic (avoiding this latency is the reason store buffers exist.) 

To change this to an asynchronous exception, the only thing that needs to happen in this snippet is to remove `trapframe^.Epc += 4`. This only makes sense if EPC points to a failed instruction. Notwithstanding a control instruction that could somehow also be the *cause* of a bus error (I don't think these exist in XR ISA), the next instruction would be the correct one to go to to skip the failed one.

TODO for myself: does instruction fetch raise a bus error. I assume it should.

The change of bus errors as asynchronous also has impacts on any code that expects bus errors to happen. This is the case in the parts of the a4x code that probe for certain devices and use the bus error as the response. However, I think all of these parts of the code use a barrier. I think it is reasonable to say that the barrier should be expected to raise any bus errors by the time it completes, so it is safe to check for the error raised flag after the instruction retires. TODO: does it need to be a serial instruction in my implementation?

## asynchronous bus errors: actually more complicated than I thought 

My core implements bus errors asynchronously, however, since a bus transaction (at least on MMIO) will have to occur before the read is complete (since you need the response), it actually appears synchronously. That is to say, the EPC would point to that failing instruction. Meanwhile, stores necessarily happen *after* commit, so the EPC would always point afterwards. This is a problem for system software trying to code the ISR that handles the bus exception. Which EPC do you use? you do not know if it is after or at the failing load/store. You can use EPC += 4, which is what the current a4x uses, and this happens to not cause problems in the couple routines that need to use bus errors, but I imagine it could cause problems if for some reason it landed on a branch. 

I don't know what the standard solution to this is. On the system software side, you can treat the exception as fully asynchronous, so you have truly no guarantee of where the EPC is, and then you just have to set it to something hardcoded when you jump back (a known location). But this is kind of a pain and I did not want to modify a4x in this way. It looks like on the ISA side, some architectures deliver bus errors via NMI, so they would be asynchronous generally speaking, while ARM has a whole system for exceptions that are synchronous, and some that are not. Even if you are not using bus errors to probe, this EPC thing is a problem if your exception handler is not guaranteed to fix the bus error, so re-executing that instruction could cause the exception to happen again. It must be a solved problem but I did not get deep enough into the implementation on existing ISAs to figure it out.

# XR barrier: consistency vs coherency
The barrier issue from before raises an interesting problem on the instruction itself, and on coherency vs consistency in general

things in here might not be fully accurate. still trying to figure it out.
TODO: read more of https://pages.cs.wisc.edu/~markhill/papers/primer2020_2nd_edition.pdf

Consistency model: describes how shared memory access should work in general. Should all access happen in program order, which can be reordered, etc. Examples:

* sequential consistency (SC): On a single execution thread you cannot reorder anything.
* total store order (TSO) (x86): everything fine except stores cannot be reordered among themselves 
* weak (riscv, arm): everything goes

Note that coherence, which ensures that execution of accesses to the SAME LOCATION happens in program order, is a REQUIREMENT for this. An incoherent system is not useful.  It is assumed in even the weakest consistency model.

So when people say "consistency problem" what they mean is a violation of the consistency model that is not an incoherency problem.

A couple things:
 * Incoherence goes away if all the actors interact directly with the same destination (same RAM).
 * Consistency problems arise from reordering accesses.  
 * Barriers are used to enforce a stronger consistency than the model normally used by the CPU. because usually they want to reorder accesses for performance (namely store to load forwarding: let an unconflicting load run ahead of a store.)

Models like TSO and weak are a problem if youre trying to talk to a device for example. you do not want loads to be forwarded in front of state-modifying commands. so you put a barrier. but there are two important things it seems:

1. if you have sequential consistency, you do not need barriers
    I have not confirmed this, but I believe it to be true. It is automatically assumed that every prior memory operation in program order has completed. It also makes sense because it is the strongest model.

2. coherence problems can still arise when using a barrier. 
    resources online frequently describe barriers as the system has "observed" all prior memory access before the later ones execute. for example arm's description:

    > This instruction ensures that all memory accesses in program order before the barrier are observed in the system before any explicit memory accesses that appear in program order after the barrier.

    but I find this confusing because there are many cases in which the system has not really observed the access. a barrier implementation usually does not mean the cache is actually flushed. like if you were writing a buffer into cached memory for a DMA, on many ISAs you would need to flush the cache separately AFAIK. This is apparently not the case on Alpha for compatibility reasons with the VAX; the DMA automatically triggers cache invalidations or writebacks.

The store buffer is a common point of discussion on *consistency* because for one, coherence is handled very easily: forward anything in the store buffer to the load unit. So coherence will not be a problem. However, a store buffer is generally implemented such that a non conflicting load can move forward in the cache even when an older store is there. Thus the consistency problem, and the need for a barrier in certain situations where a stronger guarantee is required.

Now the question is, does the behavior of the XR barrier make sense. Like most ISAs, it clears a write buffer, where the coherency is handled automatically but gives a consistency problem because it is possible for loads that do not conflict to happen out of order. But the implementation in the XR emulator and the software programmed for it also assumes it takes care of a coherence problem: namely, that the data in the cache has been written back to bus/main memory and is visible to the peripherals.

This is fine but I think this should just be handled by explicit cache invalidations. Barriers should only do something on implementations where accesses can be reordered.
My implementation for example is sequentially consistent. There may be buffering in the cache, but a load will block until the last store is done writing to it. Will's emulator is not. The write buffer makes it so that loads can happen before thsoe are visible.
So my proposal is to split the behavior of WB into solving the consistency problem specifically, and solving the coherence problem of D$ with the rest of the system as a separate thing.